29. RESOLUTION OF CALAMITIES
29.1 All calamities are resolved immediately after trading ends, before
the acquisition of civilization cards.
29.2 Non-tradable calamity cards must be retained by the players who
drew them until the end of trading. Such calamities are resolved against
the drawing player once trading is completed .
29.3 Tradable Calamity cards arc also not revealed when drawn. A
player who draws a tradable calamity eard may trade it to another player.
A player who receives such a calamity card in trade may in turn trade it
to another player, and so on, until the trading session ends. There is no
limit to the number of times a tradable calamity card may be traded. At
the end of the trading session, all calamity cards are revealed by the
players who hold them.
29.4 A player who drew a tradable calamity card need not have trll.ded
it, but such cards cannot be held for future turns. Subject to 29.5, all
calamities take effect on the turn in which they are drawn . If a player
retains a tradable calamity card, he becomes the primary victim of the
calamity, just as though the card had been traded to him. When a player
retains a tradable calamity which calls for secondary victims (Epidemic,
Iconoclasm and Heresy, and Piracy), any other eligible player may be
named as a secondary victim.
29.5 No player may be the primary victim of more than two calamities
in the same turn . If a playcr receives marc than two calamities in the
same turn, his calanmities arc shuffled together, and two are drawn at

random. The rcmaining calamities received by that player are disre-
garded and are returned to the appropriate stack of trade cards. There is

no restriction on the infliction of secondary effects of calamities.
29.6 Calamities arc resolved in ascending order, starting with Volcanic
Eruption/Earthquakeand ending with Piracy . Non·tradabl e calamities are
resolved before tradable calamities of the same numeric value (I.e., the
order of resolution is Volcanic Eruption, Treachery, Famine.
Superstition, etc.).
29.61 The player who holds a calamity card at the end of the trading
session is the primary victim of that calamity. In many cases, other
players must be selected by the primary victim as secondary victims. The
player who traded a tradable calamity card to the primary victim may not
be selected as a secondary victim.
EXAMPLE: Crete df1!.WR Epidemic. and trades it to Egypt. At the end of the tradinr seaaion. qypt loeea 16 unit poinb. and Crete is inumme from the sccondlU)' effectll of

the Epidemic, as the player who traded it to Egypt Had Crete not traded Epidemic. it
would have been the primary victim, and all other playera would be potential secondary
victims.
29.62 When resolving calamities, cities arc worth up to five unit points
and tokens are worth one unit point. If a city is reduced, surviving
tokens are not counted towards the resolution of the calamity.
EXA}.{PLE: Africa must remove ten unit points because of Famine. It could remove
two cities, ten tokens, or any combination thereof. If the African player decided to
reduce a city, leaving two tokens in its place. this would count as three unit points.
29.63 Players must fulfill their losses from calamities by the exact
amount required, if possible. If unable to do so, a player may exceed the
amount required, but only by as small an amount as is necessary.
29.64 Whenever a calamity requires that the primary victim direct effects
against other players, the primary victim must do so.
29.65 Barbarian tokens and Pirate cities are never affected by calamities.
29.7 After all calamities are resolved, they are put to one side. After
civilization cards are purchased, tradable calamity cards are shuffled
together with returned trade cards of the same value and returned , face
down, to the bottom of the appropriate stack of trade cards. Non-tradable
calamity cards are then placed at the bottom of the appropriate stack of
trade cards.
29.8 Once all calamities are resolved, players must again check for city
support as explained above (26.3).
30. CALAMITIES
30.1 The effects of tbe various calamities are set out below. The
calamities are listed in the order in which they are resolved. Thus
Volcano/Earthquake and Treachery are placed in the second trade stack,
Famine and Superstition in the third trade stack, and so on . There are no
calamities associated with the first trade card stack. These effects are
reprinted in tbe Summary of Calamity Effects.
30.2 Second level calamities
30.21 Volcanic Eruption or Eartbquake
30.211 If the primary victim has any cities in an area touched by a
volcano, the volcano erupts and eliminates all units, irrespcctive of
ownership, in the areas touched by the volcano. If the primary victim
has cities in areas touched by more than one volcano , the site of the
eruption is that which causes the greatest total damage to the primary
victim and any secondary victims. In the event of a tie, the primary
victim selects the location of the eruption.
30.212 If the primary victim has no cities in an area touched by a
volcano, one of his cities is destroyed by earthquake. One city belonging
to another player is reduced. This second city must be in an area
adjacent to the destroyed city, even across water. As above, the site of
the earthquake is that which causes the greatest total damage.
30.213 If the primary victim holds Engineering, an earthquake reduces,
rarher than destroys, his city. A player who holds Engineering may not
be selected as a secondary victim of an Earthquake. Engineering has no
effect on Volcanoes.
30.22 Treachery
30.221 One city belonging to the primary victim is replaced by one
city belonging to the player who traded him the card. If the trading

playcr has no available cities, the victim's city is eliminated. The play-
er trading the card selects the city.

30.222 If Treachery is drawn by a player and not traded , one eity
belonging to that player is reduced . As no one traded the card to thc
primary victim, no other player benefits from the primary victim's
misfortune.
30.3 Third level calamities
30.31 Famine
30.311 The pri:nary vlcttm loses ten unit points himself, and must
instruct other players to remove 20 unit points, no more than eight of
which may come from anyone player. The primary victim decides how
many unit points are lost by each of the secondary victims, but the
secondary victims decide whieh units to remove.
30.312 Players who hold Pottery may reduce their losses by four unil
pOinlsforeach Grain lrade card held. Grain cards usedfor this purpose

11
are not discarded, but must be pLacedface up infront of the player until
the end of the turn and may not be used fO acquire civilization cards until
lhe follOwing lurn.
30.32 Superstition
30.321 Three cities belonging to the primary victim are reduced. The
primary victim chooses which cities.
30.322 Jjthe primary victim has Mysticism, two cities are reduced; if the
primary victim holds Deism, one ciry is reduced; if the primary victim
holds Enlightenment, there is no effect. These effects are not cwnulative.
The governing effecr is lhar of the highest level Religion card held.
30.4 Fourth level calamities
30.41 Civil War
30.411 The primary victim's nation is divided into two factions. The
player with the most unit points in stock is the beneficiary of the Civil
War. This determination is made by counting tokens in stock (one each)
and cities in stock (five each). If the primary victim has the most units
in stock there is no Civil War.
30.412 The composition of the first faction is decided by both the
primary victim and the beneficiary as follows:
30.4121 The primary victim begins by selecting 15 unit points.
30.4122 Jjthe primary victim holds Music he selects an additionalfive
unir points. If the primary victim holds Drama and Poetry he selects an
additional five unit poinls. If lhe primary victim holds Denwcracy he
selects an additional ten unit points. The effects of Music, Drama and
Poelry, and Democracy are cumulative.
30.4123 After the primary victim completes his selection, the beneficiary
selccts an additional 20 unit points belonging to the primary victim to
complete the first faction.
30.4124 Jj the primary victim holds Philosophy, the first faction is
automatically comprised of 15 units chosen by the beneficiary, regardless
of any other civilization cards held by the primary victim.
30.413 Whatever remains constitutes the second faction . If there is no
second faction there is no Civil War.
30.414 If lhe primary victim holds MiliTary, five unit points are rembved
from eachfacIion to refleclthe increased destructiveness of the Civil War.
The required units are removed after factions are selected. Each player
must, ifpossible, remove the reqUired units from areas adjacent to the
other faction.
30.415 The primary victim then decides whether he will continue to play
the units of the first or second faction. The primary victim retains his
stock, ships, treasury , civilization cards, and position on the AS. T. The
beneficiary annexes whichever faction is not retained by the primary
victim by replacing the units involved with his own. If he runs out of
units, the remainder are taken over by the next player with the most units
in stock, and so on.
30.42 Slave Revolt
30.421 Fifteen tokens belonging to the primary victim may not be used
to support his cities. This effect is resolved immediately. After the end
of the current calamity phase, the tokens again function normally.
30.422 Cities are reduced one at a time, with the newly available tokens
being eligible to provide support for the victim's remaining cities (see
26.6). If the primary victim has less than fifteen tokens on the board,
only those tokens are affected by Slave Revolt. Tokens placed on the
board aftcr the resulting reduction of the primary victim's cities may
always be used for city support.
30.423 If the primary victim holds Mining, an additionaljive tokens may
not be usedfor dry SUppOrT. Iflhe primary victim holds Enlightenment,
the number of tokens which may not be used for city support is reduced
by five. Jj a player holds both Mining and Enlightenment, lhe effects
cancel.
30.5 Fifth level calamities
30.51 Flood
30.511 If the primary victim has units on a flood plain (4.42), he loses
a maximum of 17 unit points from that flood plain. Cities are vulnerable

12
to flood if they have been built in areas with no city site or 8. city shown
as a white square. Cities on black city sites are safe.
30.512 Ten unit points on the same flood plain belonging to one or
more secondary victims are also removed. The primary victim divides
the tcn unit point loss among the secondary victims as he chooses, but the
secondary victims themselves choose which units are to be lost. If the
number of units on the affected flood plain belonging to other players
totals ten unit points or less, all those other players automatically become
secondary victims and all their units are eliminated.
30.513 If the primary victim has units on more than one flood plain, the
flood occurs on the flood plain containing the greatest number of his unit
points. In the event of tie, the primary victim selects the location of the
flood.
30.514 If the primary victim has no units in a flood plain, one of his
coastal cities is eliminated.. The primary victim chooses the city. If the
primary victim has no coastal cities, he is unaffected by the flood.
30.515 A player who holds Engineering who has units on a flood plain
loses a maximum of seven unil points from flood, whether as a primary
or secondary victim. if a primary victim who holds Engineering has no
units on a flood plain, one of his coastal cities is reduced rarher than
e/iminazed.
30.52 Barbarian Hordes
30.521 Initial placement
30.5211 Fifteen tokens belonging to one of the nations which did not
start the game are placed in one of the primary victim's start areas.
These Barbarian tokens are placed in the start area which causes the
greatest damage to the primary victim. If the primary victim does not
have un its in any of his start areas, the Barbarians are initially placed in
an empty start area. They may be placed in an area which contains units
belonging to a player othcr than the primary victim only if no other area
is available.
30.5212 Immediately after initial placement, conflict is resolved between
the newty·placed Barbarians and any units, including those of nations
other than the primary victim, in the area occupied by the Barbarians.
30.523 Continued movement
30.5231 Once conflict arising out of their initial placement is resolved,
all surviving Barbarians in excess of the population limit of the area of
initial placement move to the adjacent area which will result in the
greatest damage to the primary victim. Conflict is again resolved.
30.5232 This process is repeated until there arc no surplus Barbarian
tokens. At the end of the calamity phase, surviving Barbarian tokens
may not exceed the population limits of the areas they occupy.
30.5233 Barharian~ always move 8S a unit, other than when they leave
tokens in areas they have already occupied. Barbarians may move across
water boundaries, but not across open sea areas.
30.5234 The movemcnt of Barbarians is governed by the principle that
they always move into the area which causes the greatest immediate
damage to the primary victim. No calculation is made as to whcther the
overall damage to the primary victim would be greater if the Barbarians
went into one area as opposed to another, as the determination of greatest
damage is made for each Barbarian movement in turn.
30.5235 All movement and conflict involving Barbarians is complcted
during the calamity phase, prior to the resolution of any other calamities.
Once the Barbarians have stopped moving, they remain on the board until
eliminated by other players. Barbarians do not increase their population
and may not be selected as secondary victims of calamities.
30.524 Conflict with other nations
30.5241 Barbarians must enter areas occupied solely by cities or tokens
belonging to the primary victim, provided they can inflict damage on the
primary victim by entering such areas. If they are unable to move into
such an area, they may enter empty areas or areas occupied by units
belonging to other nations in order to reach the nearest area in which they
can inflict damage on the primary victim.
30.5242 If Barbarians cnter areas containing units belonging to nations
other than the primary victim, they engage in conflict with those units.
Barbarians do not attack their own tokens, and thus may pass through
areas they have already occupied with no ill effects. It is possible that a

primary victim who has no units near his starting areas might not suffer
any ill effects from this calamity. as the Barbarians might exhaust
themselves ravaging and occupying areas while trying to reach the nearest
vulnerable primary victim units.
30.525 Resolving ties
30.5251 If Barbarians have a choice of areas to enter. the player who
traded the calamity to the primary victim selects the area. If the calamity
was not traded, such decisions are made by the player with the most units
in stock at the time the calamity is resolved.
30.5252 Barbarian tokens do not benefit from any of the attributes oi
their cantrall ing player.
30.526 If Barbarians eliminate a city, no trade card is drawn from the
victim.
30.527 Crete may not be the primary victim of Barbarian Hordes.
30.6 Sixth level calamities
30.61 Epidemic
30.611 The primary victim loses 16 unit points. The primary v ictim
must also order other players to lose 25 unit points of their choice, no
marc than 10 of wh ich may come from any onc player. The player who
traded Epidemic to the primary victim may not be selected as a secondary
victim.
30.612 A nation removing tokens as a result of an Epidemic must leave
at least one token in each affected area. Cities which are eliminated by
an Epidcmic are replaced by at least one token, so citics account for a
maximum of four un it points when calculating losses from this calamity.
30.613 If a primary victim of Epidemic holds Medicine, his losses are
reduced by eighl unil points. If a secondary viClim oj Epidemic holds
Medicine, his losses are reduced by five unil points.
30.614 A player who holds Roadbuilding loses an additional five unil
poinls to Epidemic, both as a primary and a secondary victim.
30.615 The effects of 30. 613 - 30.614 are cumulative.
30.7 Seventh level calamities
30.71 Ovil Disorder
30.711 All but three of the primary victim's cities are reduced. The
primary victim chooses which cities are reduced.
30.712 The number of Ihe primary victim's cities reduced is decreased
by one for each of the following civilization cards held: Music, Drama
and Poelry, Law and Democracy.
30.713 The number of the primary victim's ciries reducedis increased by
one if Ihe primary victim holds Military.
30.714 The nwnber of the pn'mary victim's cities reduced is increased by
one Ij the primary victim holds Roadbuilding.
30.715 The effects of 30.712 - 30.714 are cumulative.
30.8 Eighth level calamities
30.81 Iconoclasm and Heresy
30.811 Four of the primary victim's cities are reduced. The primary
v ictim chooses which cities are reduced.
30.812 iflhe primary victim holds Law, the number oj cities reduced is
decreased by one.
30.813 If the primary victim holds Philosophy, the number of cities
reduced is decreased by one.
30.814 If the primary victim holds Theology, the number of cities
reduced is decreased by three.
30.815 if lhe primary victim holds Monotheism, the number oj cities
reduced is increased by one.
30.816 TJlhe primary victim holds Roadbuilding, ehe number of cities
reduced is increased by one.
30.817 The effeClS of 30.812 - 30.816 are cumulative.
30.818 The primary victim must also order the reduction of a total qf
two cities belonging to other players. The player who traded Iconoclasm

and Heresy to the primary victim may not be selected as a secondary
victim.
30.819 A secondary victim who holds Philosophy may nor lose more lhan
one city as a result oj the primary victim's order. A player who holds
Theology cannol be named as a secondary victim.
30.9 Ninth level calamities
30.91 Piracy
30.911 The primary victim loses two coastal cities. The player trading
the card selects the cities. These cities are replaced by two pirate cities
belonging to one of the nations which did not start the game (for
convenience, use the same units as for Barbarian Hordes).
30.912 Two coastal cities belonging to two other players are similarly
replaced by pirate cities, even if the primary victim had fewer than two
coastal cities and was thus not himself fully affected. The primary victim
selects these cities. The secondary victims may each lose only one city.
The player who traded Piracy to the primary victim may not be selected
as a secondary victim.
30.913 Pirate cities do not require city support, and remain on the board
until attacked and destroyed. When a pirate eity is attacked, it is replaced
by unused tokens solely for the purpose of resolving combat. After
combat is resolved, any surviving pirate tokens are eliminated. When a
pirate city is destroyed, the attacker may pillage the city.